From fairest creatures we desire increase, END
That thereby beauty's rose might never die, END
But as the riper should by time decease, END
His tender heir might bear his memory: END
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes, END
Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, END
Making a famine where abundance lies, END
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel: END
Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament, END
And only herald to the gaudy spring, END
Within thine own bud buriest thy content, END
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding: END
Pity the world, or else this glutton be, END
To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.  END
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, END
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, END
Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now, END
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held: END
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies, END
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days; END
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes, END
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.  END
How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use, END
If thou couldst answer ‘This fair child of mine END
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,' END
Proving his beauty by succession thine.  END
This were to be new made when thou art old, END
And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.  END
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest, END
Now is the time that face should form another, END
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, END
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.  END
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb END
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? END
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb END
Of his self-love to stop posterity? END
Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee END
Calls back the lovely April of her prime, END
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, END
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.  END
But if thou live remembered not to be, END
Die single and thine image dies with thee.  END
Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend, END
Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy? END
Nature's bequest gives nothing but doth lend, END
And being frank she lends to those are free: END
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse, END
The bounteous largess given thee to give? END
Profitless usurer why dost thou use END
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live? END
For having traffic with thy self alone, END
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive, END
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone, END
What acceptable audit canst thou leave? END
Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, END
Which used lives th' executor to be.  END
Those hours that with gentle work did frame END
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell END
Will play the tyrants to the very same, END
And that unfair which fairly doth excel: END
For never-resting time leads summer on END
To hideous winter and confounds him there, END
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone, END
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where: END
Then were not summer's distillation left END
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, END
Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, END
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.  END
But flowers distilled though they with winter meet, END
Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.  END
Then let not winter's ragged hand deface, END
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled: END
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place, END
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed: END
That use is not forbidden usury, END
Which happies those that pay the willing loan; END
That's for thy self to breed another thee, END
Or ten times happier be it ten for one, END
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art, END
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee: END
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart, END
Leaving thee living in posterity? END
Be not self-willed for thou art much too fair, END
To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.  END
Lo in the orient when the gracious light END
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye END
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, END
Serving with looks his sacred majesty, END
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill, END
Resembling strong youth in his middle age, END
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, END
Attending on his golden pilgrimage: END
But when from highmost pitch with weary car, END
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day, END
The eyes fore duteous now converted are END
From his low tract and look another way: END
So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon: END
Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.  END
Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? END
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy: END
Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, END
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy? END
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, END
By unions married do offend thine ear, END
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds END
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear: END
Mark how one string sweet husband to another, END
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering; END
Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother, END
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing: END
Whose speechless song being many, seeming one, END
Sings this to thee, ‘Thou single wilt prove none'.  END
Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye, END
That thou consum'st thy self in single life? END
Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die, END
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife, END
The world will be thy widow and still weep, END
That thou no form of thee hast left behind, END
When every private widow well may keep, END
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind: END
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend END
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; END
But beauty's waste hath in the world an., END
And kept unused the user so destroys it: END
No love toward others in that bosom sits END
That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.  END
For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any END
Who for thy self art so unprovident.  END
Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many, END
But that thou none lov'st is most evident: END
For thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate, END
That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire, END
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate END
Which to repair should be thy chief desire: END
O change thy thought, that I may change my mind, END
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love? END
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind, END
Or to thy self at least kind-hearted prove, END
Make thee another self for love of me, END
That beauty still may live in thine or thee.  END
As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st, END
In one of thine, from that which thou departest, END
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st, END
Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest, END
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase, END
Without this folly, age, and cold decay, END
If all were minded so, the times should cease, END
And threescore year would make the world away: END
Let those whom nature hath not made for store, END
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish: END
Look whom she best.owed, she gave thee more; END
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish: END
She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby, END
Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.  END
When I do count the clock that tells the time, END
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night, END
When I behold the violet past prime, END
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white: END
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, END
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd END
And summer's green all girded up in sheaves END
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard: END
Then of thy beauty do I question make END
That thou among the wastes of time must go, END
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake, END
And die as fast as they see others grow, END
And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence END
Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.  END
O that you were your self, but love you are END
No longer yours, than you your self here live, END
Against this coming. you should prepare, END
And your sweet semblance to some other give.  END
So should that beauty which you hold in lease END
Find no determination, then you were END
Your self again after your self's decease, END
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.  END
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay, END
Which husbandry in honour might uphold, END
Against the stormy gusts of winter's day END
And barren rage of death's eternal cold? END
O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know, END
You had a father, let your son say so.  END
Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck, END
And yet methinks I have astronomy, END
But not to tell of good, or evil luck, END
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality, END
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell; END
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind, END
Or say with princes if it shall go well END
By oft predict that I in heaven find.  END
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, END
And constant stars in them I read such art END
As truth and beauty shall together thrive END
If from thy self, to store thou wouldst convert: END
Or else of thee this I prognosticate, END
Thy. is truth's and beauty's doom and date.  END
When I consider every thing that grows END
Holds in perfection but a little moment.  END
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows END
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.  END
When I perceive that men as plants increase, END
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky: END
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, END
And wear their brave state out of memory.  END
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay, END
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, END
Where wasteful time debateth with decay END
To change your day of youth to sullied night, END
And all in war with Time for love of you, END
As he takes from you, I engraft you new.  END
But wherefore do not you a mightier way END
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time? END
And fortify your self in your decay END
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme? END
Now stand you on the top of happy hours, END
And many maiden gardens yet unset, END
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers, END
Much liker than your painted counterfeit: END
So should the lines of life that life repair END
Which this Time's pencil or my pupil pen END
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair END
Can make you live your self in eyes of men.  END
To give away your self, keeps your self still, END
And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.  END
Who will believe my verse in time to come END
If it were filled with your most high deserts? END
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb END
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts: END
If I could write the beauty of your eyes, END
And in fresh numbers number all your graces, END
The age to come would say this poet lies, END
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces.  END
So should my papers yellowed with their age END
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue, END
And your true rights be termed a poet's rage, END
And stretched metre of an antique song.  END
But were some child of yours alive that time, END
You should live twice in it, and in my rhyme.  END
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? END
Thou art more lovely and more temperate: END
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, END
And summer's lease hath all too short a date: END
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, END
And often is his gold complexion dimmed, END
And every fair from fair sometime declines, END
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed: END
But thy eternal summer shall not fade, END
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, END
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade, END
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st, END
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see, END
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.  END
Devouring Time blunt thou the lion's paws, END
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood, END
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, END
And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood, END
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st, END
And do whate'er thou wilt swift-footed Time END
To the wide world and all her fading sweets: END
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime, END
O carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, END
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen, END
Him in thy course untainted do allow, END
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.  END
Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong, END
My love shall in my verse ever live young.  END
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted, END
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion, END
A woman's gentle heart but not acquainted END
With shifting change as is false women's fashion, END
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling: END
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth, END
A man in hue all hues in his controlling, END
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.  END
And for a woman wert thou first created, END
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting, END
And by addition me of thee defeated, END
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.  END
But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure, END
Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.  END
So is it not with me as with that muse, END
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse, END
Who heaven it self for ornament doth use, END
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse, END
Making a couplement of proud compare END
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems: END
With April's first-born flowers and all things rare, END
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.  END
O let me true in love but truly write, END
And then believe me, my love is as fair, END
As any mother's child, though not so bright END
As those gold candles fixed in heaven's air: END
Let them say more that like of hearsay well, END
I will not praise that purpose not to sell.  END
My glass shall not persuade me I am old, END
So long as youth and thou are of one date, END
But when in thee time's furrows I behold, END
Then look I death my days should expiate.  END
For all that beauty that doth cover thee, END
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, END
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me, END
How can I then be elder than thou art? END
O therefore love be of thyself so wary, END
As I not for my self, but for thee will, END
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary END
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.  END
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain, END
Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.  END
As an unperfect actor on the stage, END
Who with his fear is put beside his part, END
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, END
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart; END
So I for fear of trust, forget to say, END
The perfect ceremony of love's rite, END
And in mine own love's strength seem to decay, END
O'ercharged with burthen of mine own love's might: END
O let my looks be then the eloquence, END
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast, END
Who plead for love, and look for recompense, END
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.  END
O learn to read what silent love hath writ, END
To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.  END
Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled, END
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart, END
My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, END
And perspective it is best painter's art.  END
For through the painter must you see his skill, END
To find where your true image pictured lies, END
Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, END
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes: END
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done, END
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me END
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun END
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee; END
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art, END
They draw but what they see, know not the heart.  END
Let those who are in favour with their stars, END
Of public honour and proud titles boast, END
Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars END
Unlooked for joy in that I honour most; END
Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread, END
But as the marigold at the sun's eye, END
And in themselves their pride lies buried, END
For at a frown they in their glory die.  END
The painful warrior famoused for fight, END
After a thousand victories once foiled, END
Is from the book of honour razed quite, END
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled: END
Then happy I that love and am beloved END
Where I may not remove nor be removed.  END
Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage END
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit; END
To thee I send this written embassage END
To witness duty, not to show my wit.  END
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine END
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it; END
But that I hope some good conceit of thine END
In thy soul's thought all naked will bestow it: END
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving, END
Points on me graciously with fair aspect, END
And puts apparel on my tattered loving, END
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect, END
Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee, END
Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.  END
Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, END
The dear respose for limbs with travel tired, END
But then begins a journey in my head END
To work my mind, when body's work's expired.  END
For then my thoughts from far where I abide END
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, END
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, END
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.  END
Save that my soul's imaginary sight END
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, END
Which like a jewel hung in ghastly night END
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.  END
Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind, END
For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.  END
How can I then return in happy plight END
That am debarred the benefit of rest? END
When day's oppression is not eased by night, END
But day by night and night by day oppressed.  END
And each though enemies to either's reign END
Do in consent shake hands to torture me, END
The one by toil, the other to complain END
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.  END
I tell the day to please him thou art bright, END
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven: END
So flatter I the swart-complexioned night, END
When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.  END
But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, END
And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger END
When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes, END
I all alone beweep my outcast state, END
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, END
And look upon my self and curse my fate, END
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, END
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed, END
Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope, END
With what I most enjoy contented least, END
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising, END
Haply I think on thee, and then my state, END
Like to the lark at break of day arising END
From sullen earth sings hymns at heaven's gate, END
For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings, END
That then I scorn to change my state with kings.  END
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought, END
I summon up remembrance of things past, END
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, END
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: END
Then can I drown an eye unused to flow END
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, END
And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe, END
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.  END
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, END
And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er END
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, END
Which I new pay as if not paid before.  END
But if the while I think on thee dear friend END
All losses are restored, and sorrows..  END
Thy bosom is.eared with all hearts, END
Which I by lacking have supposed dead, END
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts, END
And all those friends which I thought buried.  END
How many a holy and obsequious tear END
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye, END
As interest of the dead, which now appear, END
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.  END
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, END
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, END
Who all their parts of me to thee did give, END
That due of many, now is thine alone.  END
Their images I loved, I view in thee, END
And thou all they hast all the all of me.  END
If thou survive my well-contented day, END
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover END
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey END
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover: END
Compare them with the bett'ring of the time, END
And though they be outstripped by every pen, END
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, END
Exceeded by the height of happier men.  END
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought, END
'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age, END
A dearer birth than this his love had brought END
To march in ranks of better equipage: END
But since he died and poets better prove, END
Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.  END
Full many a glorious morning have I seen, END
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye, END
Kissing with golden face the meadows green; END
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy: END
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride, END
With ugly rack on his celestial face, END
And from the forlorn world his visage hide END
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: END
Even so my sun one early morn did shine, END
With all triumphant splendour on my brow, END
But out alack, he was but one hour mine, END
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.  END
Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth, END
Suns of the world may stain, when heaven's sun staineth.  END
Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, END
And make me travel forth without my cloak, END
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, END
Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke? END
'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, END
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face, END
For no man well of such a salve can speak, END
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace: END
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief, END
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss, END
Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief END
To him that bears the strong offence's cross.  END
Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, END
And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.  END
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done, END
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud, END
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, END
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.  END
All men make faults, and even I in this, END
Authorizing thy trespass with compare, END
My self corrupting salving thy amiss, END
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are: END
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense, END
Thy adverse party is thy advocate, END
And 'gainst my self a lawful plea commence: END
Such civil war is in my love and hate, END
That I an accessary needs must be, END
To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.  END
Let me confess that we two must be twain, END
Although our undivided loves are one: END
So shall those blots that do with me remain, END
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.  END
In our two loves there is but one respect, END
Though in our lives a separable spite, END
Which though it alter not love's sole effect, END
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.  END
I may not evermore acknowledge thee, END
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame, END
Nor thou with public kindness honour me, END
Unless thou take that honour from thy name: END
But do not so, I love thee in such sort, END
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.  END
As a decrepit father takes delight, END
To see his active child do deeds of youth, END
So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite END
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.  END
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, END
Or any of these all, or all, or more END
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit, END
I make my love engrafted to this store: END
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised, END
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give, END
That I in thy abundance am sufficed, END
And by a part of all thy glory live: END
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee, END
This wish I have, then ten times happy me.  END
How can my muse want subject to invent END
While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse, END
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent, END
For every vulgar paper to rehearse? END
O give thy self the thanks if aught in me, END
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight, END
For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, END
When thou thy self dost give invention light? END
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth END
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate, END
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth END
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.  END
If my slight muse do please these curious days, END
The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.  END
O how thy worth with manners may I sing, END
When thou art all the better part of me? END
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring: END
And what is't but mine own when I praise thee? END
Even for this, let us divided live, END
And our dear love lose name of single one, END
That by this separation I may give: END
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone: END
O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove, END
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave, END
To entertain the time with thoughts of love, END
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.  END
And that thou teachest how to make one twain, END
By praising him here who doth hence remain.  END
Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all, END
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? END
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call, END
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more: END
Then if for my love, thou my love receivest, END
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest, END
But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest END
By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.  END
I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief END
Although thou steal thee all my poverty: END
And yet love knows it is a greater grief END
To bear greater wrong, than hate's known injury.  END
Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, END
Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.  END
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits, END
When I am sometime absent from thy heart, END
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits, END
For still temptation follows where thou art.  END
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won, END
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.  END
And when a woman woos, what woman's son, END
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed? END
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear, END
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth, END
Who lead thee in their riot even there END
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth: END
Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, END
Thine by thy beauty being false to me.  END
That thou hast her it is not all my grief, END
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly, END
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief, END
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.  END
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye, END
Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her, END
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, END
Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.  END
If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain, END
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss, END
Both find each other, and I lose both twain, END
And both for my sake lay on me this cross, END
But here's the joy, my friend and I are one, END
Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.  END
When most I wink then do mine eyes best see, END
For all the day they view things unrespected, END
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, END
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.  END
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright END
How would thy shadow's form, form happy show, END
To the clear day with thy much clearer light, END
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! END
How would I say mine eyes be blessed made, END
By looking on thee in the living day, END
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade, END
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay! END
All days are nights to see till I see thee, END
And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.  END
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, END
Injurious distance should not stop my way, END
For then despite of space I would be brought, END
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay, END
No matter then although my foot did stand END
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee, END
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land, END
As soon as think the place where he would be.  END
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought END
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, END
But that so much of earth and water wrought, END
I must attend, time's leisure with my moan.  END
Receiving nought by elements so slow, END
But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.  END
The other two, slight air, and purging fire, END
Are both with thee, wherever I abide, END
The first my thought, the other my desire, END
These present-absent with swift motion slide.  END
For when these quicker elements are gone END
In tender embassy of love to thee, END
My life being made of four, with two alone, END
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.  END
Until life's composition be recured, END
By those swift messengers returned from thee, END
Who even but now come back again assured, END
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.  END
This told, I joy, but then no longer glad, END
I send them back again and straight grow sad.  END
Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war, END
How to divide the conquest of thy sight, END
Mine eye, my heart thy picture's sight would bar, END
My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right, END
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie, END
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes END
But the defendant doth that plea deny, END
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.  END
To side this title is impanelled END
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart, END
And by their verdict is determined END
The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.  END
As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part, END
And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.  END
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, END
And each doth good turns now unto the other, END
When that mine eye is famished for a look, END
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother; END
With my love's picture then my eye doth feast, END
And to the painted banquet bids my heart: END
Another time mine eye is my heart's guest, END
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.  END
So either by thy picture or my love, END
Thy self away, art present still with me, END
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move, END
And I am still with them, and they with thee.  END
Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight END
Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.  END
How careful was I when I took my way, END
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, END
That to my use it might unused stay END
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! END
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are, END
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, END
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care, END
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.  END
Thee have I not locked up in any chest, END
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, END
Within the gentle closure of my breast, END
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part, END
And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear, END
For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.  END
Against that time if ever that time come END
When I shall see thee frown on my defects, END
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, END
Called to that audit by advised respects, END
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, END
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye, END
When love converted from the thing it was END
Shall reasons find of settled gravity; END
Against that time do I ensconce me here END
Within the knowledge of mine own desert, END
And this my hand, against my self uprear, END
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part, END
To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws, END
Since why to love, I can allege no cause.  END
How heavy do I journey on the way, END
When what I seek my weary travel's. END
Doth teach that case and that repose to say END
'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend. ' END
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, END
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me, END
As if by some instinct the wretch did know END
His rider loved not speed being made from thee: END
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on, END
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, END
Which heavily he answers with a groan, END
More sharp to me than spurring to his side, END
For that same groan doth put this in my mind, END
My grief lies onward and my joy behind.  END
Thus can my love excuse the slow offence, END
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed, END
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence? END
Till I return of posting is no need.  END
O what excuse will my poor beast then find, END
When swift extremity can seem but slow? END
Then should I spur though mounted on the wind, END
In winged speed no motion shall I know, END
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace, END
Therefore desire of perfect'st love being made END
Shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race, END
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade, END
Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow, END
Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.  END
So am I as the rich whose blessed key, END
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure, END
The which he will not every hour survey, END
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.  END
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, END
Since seldom coming in that long year set, END
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are, END
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.  END
So is the time that keeps you as my chest END
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, END
To make some special instant special-blest, END
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.  END
Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope, END
Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.  END
What is your substance, whereof are you made, END
That millions of strange shadows on you tend? END
Since every one, hath every one, one shade, END
And you but one, can every shadow lend: END
Describe Adonis and the counterfeit, END
Is poorly imitated after you, END
On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, END
And you in Grecian tires are painted new: END
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year, END
The one doth shadow of your beauty show, END
The other as your bounty doth appear, END
And you in every blessed shape we know.  END
In all external grace you have some part, END
But you like none, none you for constant heart.  END
O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem, END
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give! END
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem END
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live: END
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye, END
As the perfumed tincture of the roses, END
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly, END
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses: END
But for their virtue only is their show, END
They live unwooed, and unrespected fade, END
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so, END
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made: END
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, END
When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.  END
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments END
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme, END
But you shall shine more bright in these contents END
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.  END
When wasteful war shall statues overturn, END
And broils root out the work of masonry, END
Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn: END
The living record of your memory.  END
'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity END
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room, END
Even in the eyes of all posterity END
That wear this world out to the.ing doom.  END
So till the judgment that your self arise, END
You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.  END
Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said END
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, END
Which but to-day by feeding is allayed, END
To-morrow sharpened in his former might.  END
So love be thou, although to-day thou fill END
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness, END
To-morrow see again, and do not kill END
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness: END
Let this sad interim like the ocean be END
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new, END
Come daily to the banks, that when they see: END
Return of love, more blest may be the view.  END
Or call it winter, which being full of care, END
Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.  END
Being your slave what should I do but tend, END
Upon the hours, and times of your desire? END
I have no precious time at all to spend; END
Nor services to do till you require.  END
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour, END
Whilst I my sovereign watch the clock for you, END
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour, END
When you have bid your servant once adieu.  END
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought, END
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, END
But like a sad slave stay and think of nought END
Save where you are, how happy you make those.  END
So true a fool is love, that in your will, END
Though you do any thing he thinks no ill.  END
That god forbid, that made me first your slave, END
I should in thought control your times of pleasure, END
Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave, END
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.  END
O let me suffer being at your beck END
Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty, END
And patience tame to sufferance bide each check, END
Without accusing you of injury.  END
Be where you list, your charter is so strong, END
That you your self may privilage your time END
To what you will, to you it doth belong, END
Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.  END
I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, END
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.  END
If there be nothing new, but that which is, END
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled, END
Which labouring for invention bear amis END
The second burthen of a former child! END
O that record could with a backward look, END
Even of five hundred courses of the sun, END
Show me your image in some antique book, END
Since mind at first in character was done.  END
That I might see what the old world could say, END
To this composed wonder of your frame, END
Whether we are mended, or whether better they, END
Or whether revolution be the same.  END
O sure I am the wits of former days, END
To subjects worse have given admiring praise.  END
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, END
So do our minutes hasten to their., END
Each changing place with that which goes before, END
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.  END
Nativity once in the main of light, END
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned, END
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, END
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.  END
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth, END
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, END
Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, END
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.  END
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand END
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.  END
Is it thy will, thy image should keep open END
My heavy eyelids to the weary night? END
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, END
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight? END
Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee END
So far from home into my deeds to pry, END
To find out shames and idle hours in me, END
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy? END
O no, thy love though much, is not so great, END
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake, END
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, END
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.  END
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere, END
From me far off, with others all too near.  END
Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye, END
And all my soul, and all my every part; END
And for this sin there is no remedy, END
It is so grounded inward in my heart.  END
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, END
No shape so true, no truth of such account, END
And for my self mine own worth do define, END
As I all other in all worths surmount.  END
But when my glass shows me my self indeed END
beated and chopt with tanned antiquity, END
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read: END
Self, so self-loving were iniquity.  END
'Tis thee my self that for my self I praise, END
Painting my age with beauty of thy days.  END
Against my love shall be as I am now END
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn, END
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow END
With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn END
Hath travelled on to age's steepy night, END
And all those beauties whereof now he's king END
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight, END
Stealing away the treasure of his spring: END
For such a time do I now fortify END
Against confounding age's cruel knife, END
That he shall never cut from memory END
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.  END
His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, END
And they shall live, and he in them still green.  END
When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced END
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age, END
When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased, END
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.  END
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain END
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, END
And the firm soil win of the watery main, END
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.  END
When I have seen such interchange of State, END
Or state it self confounded, to decay, END
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate END
That Time will come and take my love away.  END
This thought is as a death which cannot choose END
But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.  END
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, END
But sad mortality o'ersways their power, END
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, END
Whose action is no stronger than a flower? END
O how shall summer's honey breath hold out, END
Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days, END
When rocks impregnable are not so stout, END
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays? END
O fearful meditation, where alack, END
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? END
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back, END
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? END
O none, unless this miracle have might, END
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.  END
Tired with all these for restful death I cry, END
As to behold desert a beggar born, END
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity, END
And purest faith unhappily forsworn, END
And gilded honour shamefully misplaced, END
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, END
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced, END
And strength by limping sway disabled END
And art made tongue-tied by authority, END
And folly doctor-like controlling skill, END
And simple truth miscalled simplicity, END
And captive good attending captain ill.  END
Tired with all these, from these would I be gone, END
Save that to die, I leave my love alone.  END
Ah wherefore with infection should he live, END
And with his presence grace impiety, END
That sin by him advantage should achieve, END
And lace it self with his society? END
Why should false painting imitate his cheek, END
And steal dead seeming of his living hue? END
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek, END
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? END
Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is, END
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins, END
For she hath no exchequer now but his, END
And proud of many, lives upon his gains? END
O him she stores, to show what wealth she had, END
In days long since, before these last so bad.  END
Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, END
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now, END
Before these bastard signs of fair were born, END
Or durst inhabit on a living brow: END
Before the golden tresses of the dead, END
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away, END
To live a second life on second head, END
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay: END
In him those holy antique hours are seen, END
Without all ornament, it self and true, END
Making no summer of another's green, END
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new, END
And him as for a map doth Nature store, END
To show false Art what beauty was of yore.  END
Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view, END
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend: END
All tongues the voice of souls give thee that due, END
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.  END
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned, END
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own, END
In other accents do this praise confound END
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.  END
They look into the beauty of thy mind, END
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds, END
Then churls their thoughts although their eyes were kind END
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: END
But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, END
The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.  END
That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, END
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair, END
The ornament of beauty is suspect, END
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.  END
So thou be good, slander doth but approve, END
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time, END
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, END
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.  END
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days, END
Either not assailed, or victor being charged, END
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, END
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged, END
If some suspect of ill masked not thy show, END
Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.  END
No longer mourn for me when I am dead, END
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell END
Give warning to the world that I am fled END
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell: END
Nay if you read this line, remember not, END
The hand that writ it, for I love you so, END
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, END
If thinking on me then should make you woe.  END
O if I say you look upon this verse, END
When I perhaps compounded am with clay, END
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse; END
But let your love even with my life decay.  END
Lest the wise world should look into your moan, END
And mock you with me after I am gone.  END
O lest the world should task you to recite, END
What merit lived in me that you should love END
After my death dear love forget me quite, END
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.  END
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, END
To do more for me than mine own desert, END
And hang more praise upon deceased I, END
Than niggard truth would willingly impart: END
O lest your true love may seem false in this, END
That you for love speak well of me untrue, END
My name be buried where my body is, END
And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.  END
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth, END
And so should you, to love things nothing worth.  END
That time of year thou mayst in me behold, END
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang END
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, END
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.  END
In me thou seest the twilight of such day, END
As after sunset fadeth in the west, END
Which by and by black night doth take away, END
Death's second self that seals up all in rest.  END
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire, END
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, END
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire, END
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.  END
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, END
To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.  END
But be contented when that fell arrest, END
Without all bail shall carry me away, END
My life hath in this line some interest, END
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.  END
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review, END
The very part was consecrate to thee, END
The earth can have but earth, which is his due, END
My spirit is thine the better part of me, END
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, END
The prey of worms, my body being dead, END
The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, END
Too base of thee to be remembered, END
The worth of that, is that which it contains, END
And that is this, and this with thee remains.  END
So are you to my thoughts as food to life, END
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground; END
And for the peace of you I hold such strife END
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.  END
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon END
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure, END
Now counting best to be with you alone, END
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure, END
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight, END
And by and by clean starved for a look, END
Possessing or pursuing no delight END
Save what is had, or must from you be took.  END
Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, END
Or gluttoning on all, or all away.  END
Why is my verse so barren of new pride? END
So far from variation or quick change? END
Why with the time do I not glance aside END
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? END
Why write I still all one, ever the same, END
And keep invention in a noted weed, END
That every word doth almost tell my name, END
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed? END
O know sweet love I always write of you, END
And you and love are still my argument: END
So all my best is dressing old words new, END
Spending again what is already spent: END
For as the sun is daily new and old, END
So is my love still telling what is told.  END
Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, END
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste, END
These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, END
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.  END
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show, END
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory, END
Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know, END
Time's thievish progress to eternity.  END
Look what thy memory cannot contain, END
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find END
Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain, END
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.  END
These offices, so oft as thou wilt look, END
Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.  END
So oft have I invoked thee for my muse, END
And found such fair assistance in my verse, END
As every alien pen hath got my use, END
And under thee their poesy disperse.  END
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing, END
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly, END
Have added feathers to the learned's wing, END
And given grace a double majesty.  END
Yet be most proud of that which I compile, END
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee, END
In others' works thou dost but mend the style, END
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.  END
But thou art all my art, and dost advance END
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.  END
Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid, END
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace, END
But now my gracious numbers are decayed, END
And my sick muse doth give an other place.  END
I grant sweet love thy lovely argument END
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen, END
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent, END
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again, END
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word, END
From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give END
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford END
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.  END
Then thank him not for that which he doth say, END
Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.  END
O how I faint when I of you do write, END
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, END
And in the praise thereof spends all his might, END
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.  END
But since your worth wide as the ocean is END
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, END
My saucy bark inferior far to his END
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.  END
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, END
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride, END
Or being wrecked I am a worthless boat, END
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.  END
Then if he thrive and I be cast away, END
The worst was this, my love was my decay.  END
Or I shall live your epitaph to make, END
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten, END
From hence your memory death cannot take, END
Although in me each part will be forgotten.  END
Your name from hence immortal life shall have, END
Though I once gone to all the world must die, END
The earth can yield me but a common grave, END
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie, END
Your monument shall be my gentle verse, END
Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read, END
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse, END
When all the breathers of this world are dead, END
You still shall live such virtue hath my pen END
Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.  END
I grant thou wert not married to my muse, END
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook END
The dedicated words which writers use END
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.  END
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, END
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise, END
And therefore art enforced to seek anew, END
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.  END
And do so love, yet when they have devised, END
What strained touches rhetoric can lend, END
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathized, END
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend.  END
And their gross painting might be better used, END
Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.  END
I never saw that you did painting need, END
And therefore to your fair no painting set, END
I found or thought I found you did exceed, END
That barren tender of a poet's debt: END
And therefore have I slept in your report, END
That you your self being extant well might show, END
How far a modern quill doth come too short, END
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.  END
This silence for my sin you did impute, END
Which shall be most my glory being dumb, END
For I impair not beauty being mute, END
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.  END
There lives more life in one of your fair eyes, END
Than both your poets can in praise devise.  END
Who is it that says most, which can say more, END
Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you? END
In whose confine immured is the store, END
Which should example where your equal grew.  END
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell, END
That to his subject lends not some small glory, END
But he that writes of you, if he can tell, END
That you are you, so dignifies his story.  END
Let him but copy what in you is writ, END
Not making worse what nature made so clear, END
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, END
Making his style admired every where.  END
You to your beauteous blessings add a curse, END
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.  END
My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still, END
While comments of your praise richly compiled, END
Reserve their character with golden quill, END
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.  END
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words, END
And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen, END
To every hymn that able spirit affords, END
In polished form of well refined pen.  END
Hearing you praised, I say 'tis so, 'tis true, END
And to the most of praise add something more, END
But that is in my thought, whose love to you END
Though words come hindmost holds his rank before, END
Then others, for the breath of words respect, END
Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.  END
Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, END
Bound for the prize of all too precious you, END
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, END
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? END
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write, END
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? END
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night END
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.  END
He nor that affable familiar ghost END
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, END
As victors of my silence cannot boast, END
I was not sick of any fear from thence.  END
But when your countenance filled up his line, END
Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.  END
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, END
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate, END
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing: END
My bonds in thee are all determinate.  END
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting, END
And for that riches where is my deserving? END
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, END
And so my patent back again is swerving.  END
Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, END
Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking, END
So thy great gift upon misprision growing, END
Comes home again, on better judgement making.  END
Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter, END
In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.  END
When thou shalt be disposed to set me light, END
And place my merit in the eye of scorn, END
Upon thy side, against my self I'll fight, END
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn: END
With mine own weakness being best acquainted, END
Upon thy part I can set down a story END
Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted: END
That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory: END
And I by this will be a gainer too, END
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, END
The injuries that to my self I do, END
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.  END
Such is my love, to thee I so belong, END
That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.  END
Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, END
And I will comment upon that offence, END
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt: END
Against thy reasons making no defence.  END
Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill, END
To set a form upon desired change, END
As I'll my self disgrace, knowing thy will, END
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange: END
Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue, END
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell, END
Lest I too much profane should do it wronk: END
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.  END
For thee, against my self I'll vow debate, END
For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.  END
Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now, END
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross, END
join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, END
And do not drop in for an after-loss: END
Ah do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow, END
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe, END
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, END
To linger out a purposed overthrow.  END
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, END
When other petty griefs have done their spite, END
But in the onset come, so shall I taste END
At first the very worst of fortune's might.  END
And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, END
Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.  END
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, END
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force, END
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill: END
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.  END
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure, END
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest, END
But these particulars are not my measure, END
All these I better in one general best.  END
Thy love is better than high birth to me, END
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs, END
Of more delight than hawks and horses be: END
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.  END
Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take, END
All this away, and me most wretchcd make.  END
But do thy worst to steal thy self away, END
For term of life thou art assured mine, END
And life no longer than thy love will stay, END
For it depends upon that love of thine.  END
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, END
When in the least of them my life hath., END
I see, a better state to me belongs END
Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.  END
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, END
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie, END
O what a happy title do I find, END
Happy to have thy love, happy to die! END
But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot? END
Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.  END
So shall I live, supposing thou art true, END
Like a deceived husband, so love's face, END
May still seem love to me, though altered new: END
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.  END
For there can live no hatred in thine eye, END
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change, END
In many's looks, the false heart's history END
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.  END
But heaven in thy creation did decree, END
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell, END
Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be, END
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.  END
How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, END
If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.  END
They that have power to hurt, and will do none, END
That do not do the thing, they most do show, END
Who moving others, are themselves as stone, END
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow: END
They rightly do inherit heaven's graces, END
And husband nature's riches from expense, END
Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces, END
Others, but stewards of their excellence: END
The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, END
Though to it self, it only live and die, END
But if that flower with base infection meet, END
The basest weed outbraves his dignity: END
For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds, END
Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.  END
How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame, END
Which like a canker in the fragrant rose, END
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! END
O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose! END
That tongue that tells the story of thy days, END
Making lascivious comments on thy sport END
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise, END
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.  END
O what a mansion have those vices got, END
Which for their habitation chose out thee, END
Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot, END
And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see! END
Take heed dear heart of this large privilege, END
The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.  END
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness, END
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport, END
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less: END
Thou mak'st faults graces, that to thee resort: END
As on the finger of a throned queen, END
The basest jewel will be well esteemed: END
So are those errors that in thee are seen, END
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.  END
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray, END
If like a lamb he could his looks translate! END
How many gazers mightst thou lead away, END
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! END
But do not so, I love thee in such sort, END
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.  END
How like a winter hath my absence been END
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! END
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen! END
What old December's bareness everywhere! END
And yet this time removed was summer's time, END
The teeming autumn big with rich increase, END
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime, END
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease: END
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me END
But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit, END
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, END
And thou away, the very birds are mute.  END
Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer, END
That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.  END
From you have I been absent in the spring, END
When proud-pied April dressed in all his trim END
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing: END
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.  END
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell END
Of different flowers in odour and in hue, END
Could make me any summer's story tell: END
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: END
Nor did I wonder at the lily's white, END
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose, END
They were but sweet, but figures of delight: END
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.  END
Yet seemed it winter still, and you away, END
As with your shadow I with these did play.  END
The forward violet thus did I chide, END
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, END
If not from my love's breath? The purple pride END
Which on thy soft check for complexion dwells, END
In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.  END
The lily I condemned for thy hand, END
And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair, END
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand, END
One blushing shame, another white despair: END
A third nor red, nor white, had stol'n of both, END
And to his robbery had annexed thy breath, END
But for his theft in pride of all his growth END
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.  END
More flowers I noted, yet I none could see, END
But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.  END
Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long, END
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? END
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, END
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? END
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem, END
In gentle numbers time so idly spent, END
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem, END
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.  END
Rise resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, END
If time have any wrinkle graven there, END
If any, be a satire to decay, END
And make time's spoils despised everywhere.  END
Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life, END
So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.  END
O truant Muse what shall be thy amends, END
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed? END
Both truth and beauty on my love depends: END
So dost thou too, and therein dignified: END
Make answer Muse, wilt thou not haply say, END
'Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed, END
Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay: END
But best is best, if never intermixed'? END
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? END
Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee, END
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb: END
And to be praised of ages yet to be.  END
Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how, END
To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.  END
My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming, END
I love not less, though less the show appear, END
That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming, END
The owner's tongue doth publish every where.  END
Our love was new, and then but in the spring, END
When I was wont to greet it with my lays, END
As Philomel in summer's front doth sing, END
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days: END
Not that the summer is less pleasant now END
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, END
But that wild music burthens every bough, END
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.  END
Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue: END
Because I would not dull you with my song.  END
Alack what poverty my muse brings forth, END
That having such a scope to show her pride, END
The argument all bare is of more worth END
Than when it hath my added praise beside.  END
O blame me not if I no more can write! END
Look in your glass and there appears a face, END
That over-goes my blunt invention quite, END
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.  END
Were it not sinful then striving to mend, END
To mar the subject that before was well? END
For to no other pass my verses tend, END
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.  END
And more, much more than in my verse can sit, END
Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.  END
To me fair friend you never can be old, END
For as you were when first your eye I eyed, END
Such seems your beauty still: three winters cold, END
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, END
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned, END
In process of the seasons have I seen, END
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned, END
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.  END
Ah yet doth beauty like a dial hand, END
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived, END
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand END
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.  END
For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred, END
Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.  END
Let not my love be called idolatry, END
Nor my beloved as an idol show, END
Since all alike my songs and praises be END
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.  END
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind, END
Still constant in a wondrous excellence, END
Therefore my verse to constancy confined, END
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.  END
Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument, END
Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words, END
And in this change is my invention spent, END
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.  END
Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.  END
Which three till now, never kept seat in one.  END
When in the chronicle of wasted time, END
I see descriptions of the fairest wights, END
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme, END
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights, END
Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, END
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, END
I see their antique pen would have expressed, END
Even such a beauty as you master now.  END
So all their praises are but prophecies END
Of this our time, all you prefiguring, END
And for they looked but with divining eyes, END
They had not skill enough your worth to sing: END
For we which now behold these present days, END
Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.  END
Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul, END
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come, END
Can yet the lease of my true love control, END
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.  END
The mortal moon hath her eclipse.ured, END
And the sad augurs mock their own presage, END
Incertainties now crown themselves assured, END
And peace proclaims olives of.less age.  END
Now with the drops of this most balmy time, END
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes, END
Since spite of him I'll live in this poor rhyme, END
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes.  END
And thou in this shalt find thy monument, END
When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.  END
What's in the brain that ink may character, END
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit, END
What's new to speak, what now to register, END
That may express my love, or thy dear merit? END
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine, END
I must each day say o'er the very same, END
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, END
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.  END
So that eternal love in love's fresh case, END
Weighs not the dust and injury of age, END
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, END
But makes antiquity for aye his page, END
Finding the first conceit of love there bred, END
Where time and outward form would show it dead.  END
O never say that I was false of heart, END
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify, END
As easy might I from my self depart, END
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie: END
That is my home of love, if I have ranged, END
Like him that travels I return again, END
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged, END
So that my self bring water for my stain, END
Never believe though in my nature reigned, END
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, END
That it could so preposterously be stained, END
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good: END
For nothing this wide universe I call, END
Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.  END
Alas 'tis true, I have gone here and there, END
And made my self a motley to the view, END
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, END
Made old offences of affections new.  END
Most true it is, that I have looked on truth END
Askance and strangely: but by all above, END
These blenches gave my heart another youth, END
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.  END
Now all is done, have what shall have no., END
Mine appetite I never more will grind END
On newer proof, to try an older friend, END
A god in love, to whom I am confined.  END
Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, END
Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.  END
O for my sake do you with Fortune chide, END
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, END
That did not better for my life provide, END
Than public means which public manners breeds.  END
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, END
And almost thence my nature is subdued END
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: END
Pity me then, and wish I were renewed, END
Whilst like a willing patient I will drink, END
Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection, END
No bitterness that I will bitter think, END
Nor double penance to correct correction.  END
Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye, END
Even that your pity is enough to cure me.  END
Your love and pity doth th' impression fill, END
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow, END
For what care I who calls me well or ill, END
So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? END
You are my all the world, and I must strive, END
To know my shames and praises from your tongue, END
None else to me, nor I to none alive, END
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.  END
In so profound abysm I throw all care END
Of others' voices, that my adder's sense, END
To critic and to flatterer stopped are: END
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.  END
You are so strongly in my purpose bred, END
That all the world besides methinks are dead.  END
Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind, END
And that which governs me to go about, END
Doth part his function, and is partly blind, END
Seems seeing, but effectually is out: END
For it no form delivers to the heart END
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch, END
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, END
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch: END
For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight, END
The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature, END
The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night: END
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.  END
Incapable of more, replete with you, END
My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.  END
Or whether doth my mind being crowned with you END
Drink up the monarch's plague this flattery? END
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true, END
And that your love taught it this alchemy? END
To make of monsters, and things indigest, END
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, END
Creating every bad a perfect best END
As fast as objects to his beams assemble: END
O 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing, END
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up, END
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, END
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.  END
If it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin, END
That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.  END
Those lines that I before have writ do lie, END
Even those that said I could not love you dearer, END
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why, END
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer, END
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents END
Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, END
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, END
Divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things: END
Alas why fearing of time's tyranny, END
Might I not then say ‘Now I love you best,' END
When I was certain o'er incertainty, END
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? END
Love is a babe, then might I not say so END
To give full growth to that which still doth grow.  END
Let me not to the marriage of true minds END
Admit impediments, love is not love END
Which alters when it alteration finds, END
Or bends with the remover to remove.  END
O no, it is an ever-fixed mark END
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; END
It is the star to every wand'ring bark, END
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.  END
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks END
Within his bending sickle's compass come, END
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, END
But bears it out even to the edge of doom: END
If this be error and upon me proved, END
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.  END
Accuse me thus, that I have scanted all, END
Wherein I should your great deserts repay, END
Forgot upon your dearest love to call, END
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day, END
That I have frequent been with unknown minds, END
And given to time your own dear-purchased right, END
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds END
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.  END
Book both my wilfulness and errors down, END
And on just proof surmise, accumulate, END
Bring me within the level of your frown, END
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate: END
Since my appeal says I did strive to prove END
The constancy and virtue of your love.  END
Like as to make our appetite more keen END
With eager compounds we our palate urge, END
As to prevent our maladies unseen, END
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.  END
Even so being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, END
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding; END
And sick of welfare found a kind of meetness, END
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.  END
Thus policy in love t' anticipate END
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured, END
And brought to medicine a healthful state END
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.  END
But thence I learn and find the lesson true, END
Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.  END
What potions have I drunk of Siren tears END
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within, END
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, END
Still losing when I saw my self to win! END
What wretched errors hath my heart committed, END
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never! END
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted END
In the distraction of this madding fever! END
O benefit of ill, now I find true END
That better is, by evil still made better.  END
And ruined love when it is built anew END
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.  END
So I return rebuked to my content, END
And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.  END
That you were once unkind befriends me now, END
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel, END
Needs must I under my transgression bow, END
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.  END
For if you were by my unkindness shaken END
As I by yours, y'have passed a hell of time, END
And I a tyrant have no leisure taken END
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.  END
O that our night of woe might have remembered END
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, END
And soon to you, as you to me then tendered END
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits! END
But that your trespass now becomes a fee, END
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.  END
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed, END
When not to be, receives reproach of being, END
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed, END
Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing.  END
For why should others' false adulterate eyes END
Give salutation to my sportive blood? END
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, END
Which in their wills count bad what I think good? END
No, I am that I am, and they that level END
At my abuses, reckon up their own, END
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel; END
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown END
Unless this general evil they maintain, END
All men are bad and in their badness reign.  END
Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain END
Full charactered with lasting memory, END
Which shall above that idle rank remain END
Beyond all date even to eternity.  END
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart END
Have faculty by nature to subsist, END
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part END
Of thee, thy record never can be missed: END
That poor retention could not so much hold, END
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score, END
Therefore to give them from me was I bold, END
To trust those tables that receive thee more: END
To keep an adjunct to remember thee END
Were to import forgetfulness in me.  END
No! Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change, END
Thy pyramids built up with newer might END
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange, END
They are but dressings Of a former sight: END
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire, END
What thou dost foist upon us that is old, END
And rather make them born to our desire, END
Than think that we before have heard them told: END
Thy registers and thee I both defy, END
Not wond'ring at the present, nor the past, END
For thy records, and what we see doth lie, END
Made more or less by thy continual haste: END
This I do vow and this shall ever be, END
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.  END
If my dear love were but the child of state, END
It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered, END
As subject to time's love or to time's hate, END
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.  END
No it was builded far from accident, END
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls END
Under the blow of thralled discontent, END
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls: END
It fears not policy that heretic, END
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours, END
But all alone stands hugely politic, END
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.  END
To this I witness call the fools of time, END
Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.  END
Were't aught to me I bore the canopy, END
With my extern the outward honouring, END
Or laid great bases for eternity, END
Which proves more short than waste or ruining? END
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour END
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent END
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour, END
Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent? END
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart, END
And take thou my oblation, poor but free, END
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art, END
But mutual render, only me for thee.  END
Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul END
When most impeached, stands least in thy control.  END
O thou my lovely boy who in thy power, END
Dost hold Time's fickle glass his fickle hour: END
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st, END
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.  END
If Nature sovereign mistress over wrack END
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back, END
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill END
May time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.  END
Yet fear her O thou minion of her pleasure, END
She may detain, but not still keep her treasure! END
Her audit though delayed answered must be, END
And her quietus is to render thee.  END
In the old age black was not counted fair, END
Or if it were it bore not beauty's name: END
But now is black beauty's successive heir, END
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame, END
For since each hand hath put on nature's power, END
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face, END
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy bower, END
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.  END
Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black, END
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem, END
At such who not born fair no beauty lack, END
Slandering creation with a false esteem, END
Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe, END
That every tongue says beauty should look so.  END
How oft when thou, my music, music play'st, END
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds END
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st END
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, END
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap, END
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand, END
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap, END
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.  END
To be so tickled they would change their state END
And situation with those dancing chips, END
O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, END
Making dead wood more blest than living lips, END
Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, END
Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.  END
Th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame END
Is lust in action, and till action, lust END
Is perjured, murd'rous, bloody full of blame, END
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, END
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight, END
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had END
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait, END
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.  END
Mad in pursuit and in possession so, END
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme, END
A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe, END
Before a joy proposed behind a dream.  END
All this the world well knows yet none knows well, END
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.  END
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun, END
Coral is far more red, than her lips red, END
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun: END
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head: END
I have seen roses damasked, red and white, END
But no such roses see I in her cheeks, END
And in some perfumes is there more delight, END
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.  END
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know, END
That music hath a far more pleasing sound: END
I grant I never saw a goddess go, END
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.  END
And yet by heaven I think my love as rare, END
As any she belied with false compare.  END
Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, END
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; END
For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart END
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.  END
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold, END
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan; END
To say they err, I dare not be so bold, END
Although I swear it to my self alone.  END
And to be sure that is not false I swear, END
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face, END
One on another's neck do witness bear END
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.  END
In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, END
And thence this slander as I think proceeds.  END
Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me, END
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, END
Have put on black, and loving mourners be, END
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.  END
And truly not the morning sun of heaven END
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, END
Nor that full star that ushers in the even END
Doth half that glory to the sober west END
As those two mourning eyes become thy face: END
O let it then as well beseem thy heart END
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace, END
And suit thy pity like in every part.  END
Then will I swear beauty herself is black, END
And all they foul that thy complexion lack.  END
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan END
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me; END
Is't not enough to torture me alone, END
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? END
Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken, END
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed, END
Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken, END
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed: END
Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, END
But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail, END
Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard, END
Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.  END
And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee, END
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.  END
So now I have confessed that he is thine, END
And I my self am mortgaged to thy will, END
My self I'll forfeit, so that other mine, END
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still: END
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, END
For thou art covetous, and he is kind, END
He learned but surety-like to write for me, END
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.  END
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, END
Thou usurer that put'st forth all to use, END
And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake, END
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.  END
Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me, END
He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.  END
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will, END
And Will to boot, and Will in overplus, END
More than enough am I that vex thee still, END
To thy sweet will making addition thus.  END
Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious, END
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? END
Shall will in others seem right gracious, END
And in my will no fair acceptance shine? END
The sea all water, yet receives rain still, END
And in abundance addeth to his store, END
So thou being rich in will add to thy will END
One will of mine to make thy large will more.  END
Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill, END
Think all but one, and me in that one Will.  END
If thy soul check thee that I come so near, END
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will, END
And will thy soul knows is admitted there, END
Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.  END
Will will fulfil the treasure of thy love, END
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one, END
In things of great receipt with case we prove, END
Among a number one is reckoned none.  END
Then in the number let me pass untold, END
Though in thy store's account I one must be, END
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold, END
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.  END
Make but my name thy love, and love that still, END
And then thou lov'st me for my name is Will.  END
Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes, END
That they behold and see not what they see? END
They know what beauty is, see where it lies, END
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.  END
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks, END
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride, END
Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks, END
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? END
Why should my heart think that a several plot, END
Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? END
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not END
To put fair truth upon so foul a face? END
In things right true my heart and eyes have erred, END
And to this false plague are they now transferred.  END
When my love swears that she is made of truth, END
I do believe her though I know she lies, END
That she might think me some untutored youth, END
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.  END
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, END
Although she knows my days are past the best, END
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue, END
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed: END
But wherefore says she not she is unjust? END
And wherefore say not I that I am old? END
O love's best habit is in seeming trust, END
And age in love, loves not to have years told.  END
Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, END
And in our faults by lies we flattered be.  END
O call not me to justify the wrong, END
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart, END
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue, END
Use power with power, and slay me not by art, END
Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight, END
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside, END
What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might END
Is more than my o'erpressed defence can bide? END
Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows, END
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies, END
And therefore from my face she turns my foes, END
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: END
Yet do not so, but since I am near slain, END
Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.  END
Be wise as thou art cruel, do not press END
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain: END
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express, END
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.  END
If I might teach thee wit better it were, END
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so, END
As testy sick men when their deaths be near, END
No news but health from their physicians know.  END
For if I should despair I should grow mad, END
And in my madness might speak ill of thee, END
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, END
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.  END
That I may not be so, nor thou belied, END
Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.  END
In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes, END
For they in thee a thousand errors note, END
But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, END
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.  END
Nor are mine cars with thy tongue's tune delighted, END
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone, END
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited END
To any sensual feast with thee alone: END
But my five wits, nor my five senses can END
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, END
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man, END
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be: END
Only my plague thus far I count my gain, END
That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.  END
Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, END
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving, END
O but with mine, compare thou thine own state, END
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving, END
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine, END
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments, END
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine, END
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.  END
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those, END
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee, END
Root pity in thy heart that when it grows, END
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.  END
If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, END
By self-example mayst thou be denied.  END
Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch, END
One of her feathered creatures broke away, END
Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch END
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay: END
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, END
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent, END
To follow that which flies before her face: END
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent; END
So run'st thou after that which flies from thee, END
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind, END
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me: END
And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind.  END
So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will, END
If thou turn back and my loud crying still.  END
Two loves I have of comfort and despair, END
Which like two spirits do suggest me still, END
The better angel is a man right fair: END
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.  END
To win me soon to hell my female evil, END
Tempteth my better angel from my side, END
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil: END
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.  END
And whether that my angel be turned fiend, END
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell, END
But being both from me both to each friend, END
I guess one angel in another's hell.  END
Yet this shall I ne'er know but live in doubt, END
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.  END
Those lips that Love's own hand did make, END
Breathed forth the sound that said ‘I hate', END
To me that languished for her sake: END
But when she saw my woeful state, END
Straight in her heart did mercy come, END
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet, END
Was used in giving gentle doom: END
And taught it thus anew to greet: END
‘I hate' she altered with an., END
That followed it as gentle day, END
Doth follow night who like a fiend END
From heaven to hell is flown away.  END
‘I hate', from hate away she threw, END
And saved my life saying ‘not you'.  END
Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth, END
My sinful earth these rebel powers array, END
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth END
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? END
Why so large cost having so short a lease, END
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? END
Shall worms inheritors of this excess END
Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's.? END
Then soul live thou upon thy servant's loss, END
And let that pine to aggravate thy store; END
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; END
Within be fed, without be rich no more, END
So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men, END
And death once dead, there's no more dying then.  END
My love is as a fever longing still, END
For that which longer nurseth the disease, END
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, END
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please: END
My reason the physician to my love, END
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept END
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve, END
Desire is death, which physic did except.  END
Past cure I am, now reason is past care, END
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest, END
My thoughts and my discourse as mad men's are, END
At random from the truth vainly expressed.  END
For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright, END
Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.  END
O me! what eyes hath love put in my head, END
Which have no correspondence with true sight, END
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled, END
That censures falsely what they see aright? END
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, END
What means the world to say it is not so? END
If it be not, then love doth well denote, END
Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no, END
How can it? O how can love's eye be true, END
That is so vexed with watching and with tears? END
No marvel then though I mistake my view, END
The sun it self sees not, till heaven clears.  END
O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind, END
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.  END
Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not, END
When I against my self with thee partake? END
Do I not think on thee when I forgot END
Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake? END
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend, END
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon, END
Nay if thou lour'st on me do I not spend END
Revenge upon my self with present moan? END
What merit do I in my self respect, END
That is so proud thy service to despise, END
When all my best doth worship thy defect, END
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? END
But love hate on for now I know thy mind, END
Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.  END
O from what power hast thou this powerful might, END
With insufficiency my heart to sway, END
To make me give the lie to my true sight, END
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? END
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, END
That in the very refuse of thy deeds, END
There is such strength and warrantise of skill, END
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds? END
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, END
The more I hear and see just cause of hate? END
O though I love what others do abhor, END
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.  END
If thy unworthiness raised love in me, END
More worthy I to be beloved of thee.  END
Love is too young to know what conscience is, END
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? END
Then gentle cheater urge not my amiss, END
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.  END
For thou betraying me, I do betray END
My nobler part to my gross body's treason, END
My soul doth tell my body that he may, END
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason, END
But rising at thy name doth point out thee, END
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride, END
He is contented thy poor drudge to be, END
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.  END
No want of conscience hold it that I call, END
Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.  END
In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn, END
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing, END
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn, END
In vowing new hate after new love bearing: END
But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, END
When I break twenty? I am perjured most, END
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee: END
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.  END
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness: END
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy, END
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness, END
Or made them swear against the thing they see.  END
For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I, END
To swear against the truth so foul a be.  END
Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep, END
A maid of Dian's this advantage found, END
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep END
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground: END
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love, END
A dateless lively heat still to.ure, END
And grew a seeting bath which yet men prove, END
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure: END
But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, END
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast, END
I sick withal the help of bath desired, END
And thither hied a sad distempered guest.  END
But found no cure, the bath for my help lies, END
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.  END
The little Love-god lying once asleep, END
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand, END
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep, END
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand, END
The fairest votary took up that fire, END
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed, END
And so the general of hot desire, END
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed.  END
This brand she quenched in a cool well by, END
Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, END
Growing a bath and healthful remedy, END
For men discased, but I my mistress' thrall, END
Came there for cure and this by that I prove, END
Love's fire heats water, water cools not love. 